New rule: No keyboard shortcuts use only letter, number, sign or punctuation keys (#873)
act-rules/act-rules.github.io: _rules/printable-characters-shortcut-ffbc54.md

accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:2.1.4: # Character Key Shortcuts (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: satisfied
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - João Vicente
    - Carlos Duarte
---

## Applicability

The rule applies to any [keyboard event][] for which all of the following is true: 
- the event's attribute `key` is a [printable character][] key; and
- the event's method `getModifierState` returns `false` for each of the [valid modifier keys][]; and
- the event causes [changes in the content][changes in content] of the [HTML document][].

## Expectation

For each test target at least one of the following is true:
- (**remap**:) there is at least one [set of clearly labeled instruments][] to [block events][blocked event] that use the [same key][same key events] as the test target and whose `getModifierState` method returns `false` for each of the [valid modifier keys][]; or

> - (**focus**:) the [event target][] has a [semantic role][] that inherits from the [abstract role](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#abstract_roles) of `widget`.

Reviewer: There is one edge case we seem to not handle…
If there is a remap mechanism to block the event unless the widget has focus.

OTOH, strict reading of the SC seems to not allow that… So I guess this is OK…

---
id: ffbc54
name: No keyboard shortcut uses only printable characters
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that if keyboard shortcuts are implemented using only printable characters, then there is a mechanism to disable the shortcut, or to remap the shortcut to use one or more non-printable character keys, or the shortcut for a user interface component is only available when that component has focus.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:2.1.4: # Character Key Shortcuts (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: satisfied
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - João Vicente
    - Carlos Duarte
---

## Applicability

> The rule applies to any [keyboard event][] for which all of the following is true: 

Reviewer 2: I'm not too sure about targeting events with the applicability. It means this requires some additional "rigger the event" step to run this rule. That may not be done consistently, which would lead to inconsistent results. I think a better thing to do here is to apply this to event handlers instead.

Reviewer: I am not sure triggering event handlers would solve this.
Testers do not necessarily have easy access to the event handlers (e.g. imported from some minified external lib). Plus, figuring out what the code actually does is undecidable…
So even with targeting handlers, testers may decide to trigger the event and see if changes happen.

Reviewer 3: I agree with @Jym77 that moving to event handlers probably won't change the testing procedure. Furthermore, we had an initial version using event handlers, which proved to be more challenging to write (earlier comments can show you why).

- the event's attribute `key` is a [printable character][] key; and
- the event's method `getModifierState` returns `false` for any of the [valid modifier keys][]; and
- the event causes [changes in the content][changes in content] of the [HTML document][].

## Expectation

For each test target at least one of the following is true:
- (**remap**:) there is at least one [set of clearly labeled instruments][] to [block events][blocked event] that use the [same key][same key events] as the test target and whose `getModifierState` method returns `false` for any of the [valid modifier keys][]; or

> - (**focus**:) the [event target][] has a [semantic role][] that inherits from the [abstract role](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#abstract_roles) of `widget`.

Reviewer 2: How come you didn't use this in the applicability? Seems like it would be appropriate there.

Reviewer 3: Because the SC also applies to elements that are not widgets. And if the event target is a widget, then the remap would not be necessary.

> - (**Focus**:) the [event target][] has a [semantic role][] that inherits from the [abstract role](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#abstract_roles) of `widget`.

Reviewer 4: I don't think this is the same as the element only reacting to keyboard shortcuts if it has focus. For example, passed example 5 would fail right? Because the event target doesn't have a widget role. Or do I misunderstand event target?

Reviewer 3: You're correct. This is not the same. But the current rule formulation does not target "keyboard shortcuts", but "keyboard events". By definition of keyboard event, it is always dispatched to the element that has focus. Therefore, we cannot check if the element has focus (it always has).
Because the SC requires the focus condition only for "user interface components", we used this workaround. Instead of checking if the element has focus, we check if the element with focus is a widget (that is, a user interface component).

In passed example 5, the event target that requires focus for the shortcut to work is the `input type="text` element. Therefore, it inherits from the `widget` role. All other elements make the event not applicable because it won't cause changes in content.

> - (**Focus**:) the [event target][] has a [semantic role][] that inherits from the [abstract role](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#abstract_roles) of `widget`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- (**focus**:) the [event target][] has a [semantic role][] that inherits from the [abstract role](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#abstract_roles) of `widget`.
```

    <div>
      <div>Remap shortcut</div>
      <div>
        <label>
          <input id="remap" type="checkbox" onclick="toggleModifier('firstShortcut', this.checked); toggleModifier('secondShortcut', this.checked);">
          Use "ctrl" key together with the "+" or "a" key
        </label>
      </div>
    </div>
    <br />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

#### Passed Example 5

This [HTML document][] is listening to [keyboard events][keyboard event] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false` that cause [changes in content][], but the [events are blocked][blocked event] when no `widget` has [focus][].

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Passed Example 5</title>
    <script src="/test-assets/ffbc54/shortcut.js"></script>
  </head>

  <body onload="registerShortcut({shortcutKey: '+', focusOnly: true}); activateShortcuts();">
    <label for="target">Add to list (press "+" to add):</label>
    <input type="text" id="target" />
    <br />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

#### Passed Example 6

> This [HTML document][] is listening to [keyboard events][keyboard event] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false` that cause [changes in content][]. There exists a [set of clearly labeled instruments][] to disable the [keyboard event][] or to **remap** the [keyboard event][] so that [same key][same key events] events are [blocked][blocked event] unless `getModifierState("Control")` returns `true`.

Reviewer 5: I have travel to understand the first of these two sentences. An attempt to clarify follows:

```suggestion
This [HTML document][] is listening to [keyboard events][keyboard event] which attribute `key` is a [printable character][], which method `getModifierState` returns `false`, and which cause [changes in content][]. There exists a [set of clearly labeled instruments][] to disable the [keyboard event][] or to **remap** the [keyboard event][] so that [same key][same key events] events are [blocked][blocked event] unless `getModifierState("Control")` returns `true`.
```

---
id: ffbc54
name: No keyboard shortcuts use only printable characters
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that if keyboard shortcuts are implemented using only printable characters, then there is a mechanism to disable the shortcut, or to remap the shortcut to use one or more non-printable characters keys, or the shortcut for a user interface component is only available when that component has focus.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:2.1.4: # Character Key Shortcuts (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: satisfied
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - João Vicente
    - Carlos Duarte
---

## Applicability

The rule applies to any [keyboard event][] for which all is true: 

> - the event's attribute `key` is a [printable character][] key; and

Reviewer: Can `key` not be a printable character?
Typically because `ctrl` or `shift` are going to be passed as modifiers, not as `key`.
Similarly, the inapplicable examples with "non-printable character" should be checked to see whether it's really going to be a non-printable character, or requiring `getModifierKey` to be true.

Reviewer 3: It can. Example: escape (there are more)

Reviewer: We should have an inapplicable example with this.

Which by the way shows that Inapplicable Example 1 is not really correct (at least in its description). The event can make change if `key` is printable, as long as `getModifierState("Control")` returns `true`…

Reviewer 3: Agree in both accounts. I've updated Example 1 to use the Escape key, irrespectively of the modifier.

- the event's method `getModifierState` returns `false` for any of the [valid modifier keys][]; and

> - the event is [dispatched][] to an [event target][] within a [HTML document][].

Reviewer: Not sure that the "dispatched" applicability is still needed. I think it was introduced before we had all the "change in content" stuff, as a way to say "the event does something". We might get rid of it altogether and consider that the event which is not dispatched will cause no change in content and thus pass the rule one way or another.

## Expectation

For each test target at least one of the following is true:
 - **Remap**: there is at least one [set of clearly labeled instruments][] to [block events][blocked event] that use the [same key][same key events] as the test target and whose `getModifierState` method returns `false` for any of the [valid modifier keys][]; or

>  - **Focus**: if the [event target][] doesn't have [focus][] the event does not cause [changes in content][] of the [HTML document][].

Reviewer: And I realise that we're having problems with that… 😱 

---
As far as I understand https://www.w3.org/TR/uievents/#interface-keyboardevent when a key is pressed, the browser is dispatching the keyboard event to the element that has focus and then the element bubbles up (actually it's more complicated) until an ancestor with a listener is found and propagation is stopped.

But that means that the event target **always** has focus when the event is dispatched. In our cases, where the event listener is registered on the `body` element, if focus is on an unrelated element (e.g. the "disable" button), then the event will be dispatched to that event target, which has focus, bubbles up to the `body`, and makes changes in the content. But the event target having focus means that the **Focus** condition passes no matter what 😭 

I do not know how to fix that… We kind of have a notion of "target" which is not the event target (in the examples, the "target" is the input field). But the event listener can be on any ancestor of that "target".

Reviewer 3: You are right. And this made my head hurt!!! I think I came up with a solution. Please do check for flaws, as there might be some.
The SC only looks at the focus condition when the keyboard shortcut is for user interface components (it's not totally clear what this means). But I'm assuming the shortcut should have an effect only when the focus is on a user interface component. Given that the event target will always be the element that has the focus, I'm changing the expectation to check that changes don't happen if the event target is not a widget.

- If there are ways to disable the result of [keyboard events][keyboard event] that do not require the user to interact with the web page (e.g. a setting at the operating system level), failing this rule might not be a failure of the success criterion.

## Accessibility Support

Currently [keyboard events][keyboard event] only support the types `keydown` and `keyup`. [Keyboard events][keyboard event] of type `keypressed` are considered [legacy keyboard events][] and are thus ignored by this rule.

## Background

- [Understanding Success Criterion 2.1.4: Character Key Shortcuts](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/character-key-shortcuts.html)
- [G217 Providing a mechanism to allow users to remap or turn off character key shortcuts](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G217)
- [F99 Failure of Success Criterion 2.1.4 due to implementing character key shortcuts that cannot be turned off or remapped](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F99)

## Test Cases

> ### Passed

Reviewer: We could have an example where 2 instruments are needed to remap/disable the event. That would illustrate the "set of instruments" (for a single event) part of the expectation.
Something like 2 checkboxes.
I feel this is very contrived and not natural, but that these kinds of cases could occur (e.g., settings are locked by default and require a toggle to unlock, and then the actual setting can be changed).

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Passed Example 3</title>
    <script src="/test-assets/ffbc54/shortcut.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body onload="registerShortcut({id: 'firstShortcut', shortcutKey: '+'}); registerShortcut({id: 'secondShortcut', shortcutKey: 'a'}); activateShortcuts();">
    <label for="target">Add to list (press "+" or "a" to add):</label>
    <input type="text" id="target" />
    <div>
      <div>Remap shortcut</div>
      <div>
        <label>
          <input id="remap1" type="checkbox" onclick="toggleModifier('firstShortcut', this.checked)">
          Use "ctrl" key together with the "+" key
        </label>
        <label>
          <input id="remap2" type="checkbox" onclick="toggleModifier('secondShortcut', this.checked)">
          Use "ctrl" key together with the "a" key
        </label>
      </div>
    </div>
    <br />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

#### Passed Example 4

> This [HTML document][] has two [keyboard events][keyboard event] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`, and exists an [instrument][] to **remap** the [keyboard event][] so that it requires that the method `getModifierState` returns `true`. In this example, the same [instrument][] is used to **remap** both [keyboard events][keyboard event]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This [HTML document][] is listening to [keyboard events][keyboard event] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`, and there exists an [instrument][] to **remap** those [keyboard events][keyboard event] that cause [change in content][] so that [same key][] events are [blocked][blocked event] unless `getModifierState("Control")` returns `true`. In this example, the same [instrument][] is used to **remap** all [keyboard events][keyboard event].
```

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Passed Example 4</title>
    <script src="/test-assets/ffbc54/shortcut.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body onload="registerShortcut({id: 'firstShortcut', shortcutKey: '+'}); registerShortcut({id: 'secondShortcut', shortcutKey: 'a'}); activateShortcuts();">
    <label for="target">Add to list (press "+" or "a" to add):</label>
    <input type="text" id="target" />
    <div>
      <div>Remap shortcut</div>
      <div>
        <label>
          <input id="remap" type="checkbox" onclick="toggleModifier('firstShortcut', this.checked); toggleModifier('secondShortcut', this.checked);">
          Use "ctrl" key together with the "+" or "a" key
        </label>
      </div>
    </div>
    <br />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

#### Passed Example 5

> This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`, but the [event is blocked][blocked event] when the [event target][] doesn't have [focus][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This [HTML document][] is listening to [keyboard events][keyboard event] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`, but the [events are blocked][blocked event] when no `widget` has [focus][].
```

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Passed Example 5</title>
    <script src="/test-assets/ffbc54/shortcut.js"></script>
  </head>

  <body onload="registerShortcut({shortcutKey: '+', focusOnly: true}); activateShortcuts();">
    <label for="target">Add to list (press "+" to add):</label>
    <input type="text" id="target" />
    <br />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

#### Passed Example 6

> This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`, and there is an [instrument][] to disable the [keyboard event][] and another [instrument][] to **remap** the [keyboard event][] so that it requires that the method `getModifierState` returns `true`. The [instruments][instrument] can be found from a [clearly labeled location][].

Reviewer: We probably don't need both disable and remap anymore.

(+streamline description, also use "set of clearly labelled instruments")

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Passed Example 6</title>
    <script src="/test-assets/ffbc54/shortcut.js"></script>
    <script>
      function openModal() {
        document.getElementById('overlay').style.display = 'block'
      }
      function closeModal() {
        document.getElementById('overlay').style.display = 'none'
      }

>     </script>

Reviewer: We may want to move these scripts to `shortcut.js` for the sake of keeping the inlined part of the example not too big.

  </head>
  <body onload="registerShortcut({id: 'singleShortcut', shortcutKey: '+'}); activateShortcuts();">
    <div
      style="
        display: none;
        position: fixed;
        top: 2em;
        left: 10em;
        background-color: #505050;
        color: white;
        padding: 1em;
        padding-top: 0em;

>       "

Reviewer: Given that this style is fairly big and only marginally relevant to the example (it's important but almost all values could change without changing the example), I'd move it to the `head` or even to a separate CSS file.

		  id="overlay"
	  >
      <p>Disable/remap shortcut</p>
      <label>
        <input type="checkbox" onclick="toggleDisabled('singleShortcut', !this.checked)" checked>
        Toggle single character keyboard shortcut
      </label>
      <br>
      <label>
        <input id="remap" type="checkbox" onclick="toggleModifier('singleShortcut', this.checked)">
        Use "ctrl" key together with the "+" key
      </label>
      <br>
      <button onclick="closeModal();">Dismiss</button>
    </div>
    <p>To control the shortcuts activate the "Control shortcuts" button.</p>
    <input type="button" onclick="openModal()" value="Control shortcuts" />
    
    <label for="target">Add to list (press "+" to add):</label>
    <input type="text" id="target" />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

> This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`, but there is no [instrument][] to **remap** the [keyboard event][] and the [keyboard event][] is not [blocked][blocked event] when the [event target][] does not have [focus][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This [HTML document][] is listening to [keyboard events][keyboard event] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`. There is no [instrument][] to **remap** the [keyboard event][] and the [keyboard events][keyboard event] are not [blocked][blocked event] when no `widget` has [focus][].
```

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Failed Example 1</title>
    <script src="/test-assets/ffbc54/shortcut.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body onload="registerShortcut({shortcutKey: '+', disabled: false}); activateShortcuts();">
    <label for="target">Add to list (press "+" to add):</label>
    <input type="text" id="target" />
    <br />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

#### Failed Example 2

> This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`, and there is an [instrument][] to disable the [keyboard event][] and another [instrument][] to **remap** the [keyboard event][] so that it requires that the method `getModifierState` returns `true`, but the [instruments][instrument] are not in a [clearly labeled location][].

Reviewer: Same remark about only needing one of disable/remap, not both.

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Failed Example 2</title>
    <script src="/test-assets/ffbc54/shortcut.js"></script>
    <script>
      function openModal() {
        document.getElementById('overlay').style.display = 'block'
      }
      function closeModal() {
        document.getElementById('overlay').style.display = 'none'
      }
    </script>
  </head>
  <body onload="registerShortcut({id: 'singleShortcut', shortcutKey: '+'}); activateShortcuts();">
    <div
      style="
        display: none;
        position: fixed;
        top: 2em;
        left: 10em;
        background-color: #505050;
        color: white;
        padding: 1em;
        padding-top: 0em;

>       "

Reviewer: Same remark about JS and style. The fact that it is shared makes it even more valuable to share it.

		  id="overlay"
	  >
      <p>Disable/remap shortcut</p>
      <label>
        <input type="checkbox" onclick="toggleDisabled('singleShortcut', !this.checked)" checked>
        Toggle single character keyboard shortcut
      </label>
      <br>
      <label>
        <input id="remap" type="checkbox" onclick="toggleModifier('singleShortcut', this.checked)">
        Use "ctrl" key together with the "+" key
      </label>
      <br>
      <button onclick="closeModal();">Dismiss</button>
    </div>
    
    <input type="button" onclick="openModal()" value="Open modal" />
    
    <label for="target">Add to list (press "+" to add):</label>
    <input type="text" id="target" />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

### Inapplicable

#### Inapplicable Example 1

> This document is not an [HTML document][].

Reviewer: This is not part of the Applicability anymore.

```html
<svg height="100" width="100">
  <circle cx="50" cy="50" r="40" stroke="black" stroke-width="3" fill="red" />
  Sorry, your browser does not support inline SVG.  
</svg>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 2

> This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `true`.

Reviewer: Technically, with the current Applicability, this is Passed.
The event `keypressed "z"` is applicable. But it passes the **focus** condition because it makes no change in content (whatever has focus).

This does strongly push toward moving "make changes in content" to Applicability.
Otherwise, everything will be applicable. Event in a document with no event listener, each single key event will still be applicable and pass because it make no change in content when no `widget` is focused.

Reviewer 3: I'm convinced. You're right, that the current applicability means everything is applicable (because it is only dependent on the event, which is controlled by the tester, without any influence from the document).

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Inapplicable Example 2</title>
    <script src="/test-assets/ffbc54/shortcut.js"></script>
  </head>

  <body onload="registerShortcut({shortcutKey: '+', ctrlKey: true}); activateShortcuts();">
    <label for="target">Add to list (press "ctrl" and "+" to add):</label>
    <input type="text" id="target" />
    <br />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [non-printable character][non-printable characters].

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Inapplicable Example 3</title>
    <script src="/test-assets/ffbc54/shortcut.js"></script>
  </head>

  <body onload="registerShortcut({ctrlKey: true}); activateShortcuts();">

>     <label for="target">Add to list (press "ctrl" and "+" to add):</label>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <label for="target">Add to list (press "ctrl" to add):</label>
```

    <input type="text" id="target" />
    <br />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 4

> This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] that is not [dispatched][] to an [event target][].

Reviewer: I know I've been pushing for that example back in the days, but I realise it is incorrect (event are always dispatched to an event target) and un-needed (we've removed that part of the applicability).

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Inapplicable Example 4</title>
    <script>
      function shortcut() {
        window.addEventListener('keydown', function(event) {
          const target = document.getElementById("target");

          if (event.key === "+") {
            document.getElementById("list").innerHTML += "<li>" + target.value + "</li>";
            target.value = "";
            event.preventDefault();
          }
        });
      }
    </script>
  </head>

  <body onload="shortcut()">
    <label for="target">Add to list (press "+" to add):</label>
    <input type="text" id="target" />
    <br />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 5

> This [HTML document][] has an element with the attribute `accesskey`. Accesskeys use [non-printable characters][].

Reviewer: Is it a non-printable character or a `getModifierState`?

Reviewer 3: From what I could find out, accesskeys across the different browser/OS combinations all end up being different combinations of modifier keys. So, we can remove this example also.

---
id: ffbc54
name: No keyboard shortcuts use only printable characters
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that if keyboard shortcuts are implemented using only printable characters, then there is a mechanism to disable the shortcut, or to remap the shortcut to use one or more non-printable characters keys, or the shortcut for a user interface component is only available when that component has focus.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:2.1.4: # Character Key Shortcuts (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: satisfied
    inapplicable: further testing needed
acknowledgements:
  authors:
    - João Vicente
    - Carlos Duarte

> ---

Reviewer: Input aspects are missing.

## Applicability

> The rule applies to any [keyboard event][]: 

Reviewer: Thinking about the composition of the rule and I'm now running into this problem…

If we target the (DOM) keyboard event, then the (**focus**) condition is OK, but the (**disable**)/(**remap**) isn't really…
1. I press 'a'. A keyboard event fires and does stuff (bad).
2. I activate some UI control.
3. I press 'a'. A keyboard event fires but is now disabled by the previous step.

Now, the problem is that steps 1. and 3. are **two different** keyboard events. So the first one is actually failing the rule because we can't go back in time and block it.

I think that the (**disable**)/(**remap**) condition can be rephrased as blocking future events with the same `key` attribute and dispatched to the same event target.

Going that direction does cause a risk of needing to check stuff in an unspecified distant future. Which is actually sort of already present:
If a button disable the 'a' shortcut for the next hour (and automatically re-enable it afterwards), is it passing the rule? the SC? should it be?
This is a bit different from the "blocking" duration (nothing happen <1min after firing the event) but somewhat similar: how long am I supposed to watch the page to decide that the event has been disabled?

Reviewer 3: There's already an issue open to discuss the question of how long the event needs to remain disabled.

On the other topic, I don't agree that the first event fails the rule if in the future (i.e. the process of testing the rule) we discover that there is an instrument to disable or remap the shortcut. That's what the rule states.

> The rule applies to any [keyboard event][]: 

Reviewer: Concerning composition and https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/873#discussion_r409389247 I think that the situation has changed because the rule now targets events and not "shorcuts". The example in that message was about an element that would react to several different events (with `key` 'a', 'b', and 'c'). And this shortcut wasn't passing the rule.

Now, the rule targets each of the 3 events (and also the events with `key` 'd', 'e', … that cause no change in content). So now we can have each of these events handled in a separate way, which is already what the expectation does, and a composite rule could make sense again.

OTOH, I think now that with the introduction of the 2 new definitions, the conditions are short enough and making this a composite rule wouldn't be that beneficial (wouldn't really help understanding it). So I guess that we are good for now… (might change if the expectations get too complex again 😉 )

Reviewer 3: I agree with both statements :-)

 - where the attribute `key` is a [printable character][] key; and
 - the method `getModifierState` returns `false`; and
 - is [dispatched][] to an [event target][] within a [HTML document][].

> 

Reviewer: There should be a condition that the event is not already blocked.
Well, technically, if it's already blocked, then (**focus**) is true and the event passes the rule, but maybe we'd like it to be inapplicable instead.

Reviewer 3: Could you elaborate on this? I'm afraid I don't understand where you're getting at :-(

Reviewer: If an element listens to keyboard events and does stuff when 'a' is pressed. The element still receive the single-key event 'b'. But that event is already blocked (nothing happens).
Technically, that doesn't pass the "disable" condition: there is no instrument to disable the 'b' events. It does pass the "focus" condition: if the element isn't focused, then the 'b' events are blocked.

But maybe we want that to be in the applicability instead and make the 'b' events inapplicable instead.

Reviewer 3: Got it! Thanks for the explanation. I think that makes sense, but I think I would prefer to make inapplicable those events that cause no "changes in content" instead of those that are "blocked". It is the same, but I find it more understandable. What do you think?

## Expectation

For each test target at least one of the following is true:
 - (**Disable**:) There is at least one [set of clearly labelled instruments][] to [block the event][blocked event]; or

>  - (**Remap**:) There is at least one [set of clearly labelled instruments][] to [block the event][blocked event] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` doesn't return `true`; or

Reviewer 3: Yes. For example, passed examples 1 and 4 are different because the instrument is different:
- The instrument in passed example 1 always blocks the shortcut after activated. 
- The instrument in passed example 4 only blocks the shortcut if no modifier key is used. 

Testing the expectation of the rule is a process where the operation of the instruments needs to be checked. The outcome of the events is not checked at the time of inspecting the event (the expectation reads "There is at least one set of clearly labelled instruments to block the event" not "There is at least one set of clearly labelled instruments blocking the event")

>  - (**Remap**:) There is at least one [set of clearly labelled instruments][] to [block the event][blocked event] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` doesn't return `true`; or

Reviewer: The instrument is different, but any instrument that always blocks the event is also an instrument that blocks when `getModifierKey` is false.

If I test Passed Example 2:
1. I press 'a' without focus, something happens. So **focus** condition is false.
2. I activate the instrument.
3. I press 'a', nothing happens. `getModifierKey` was false for all valid modifier, so **remap** condition is true.
  Is **disable** condition true? I don't know yet. So far, I have no way in differenciating Passed Examples 2 and 4
4. So, I try to press 'Alt+a'. Nothing happen. But I still can't make the difference with Passed Example 4.
5. So I try 'CapsLock+a', … (14 modifiers keys total (and I'm not sure whether there can be several at the same time to a whopping 2¹⁴ combinations)). After trying all of these, I know that the event is always disabled, not just for some modifiers keys.

Now, why would I do steps 4-5. After step 3, I already now that the rule pass. So, as a tester I will not make any difference between Passed Example 2 and 4 and I will never know if the **disable** condition is true or not.

I suggest we ditch the **disable** condition, keep Passed Example 2 and mention in the description that "disabled" implies "disabled when `getModifierKey` is false".

>  - (**Remap**:) There is at least one [set of clearly labelled instruments][] to [block the event][blocked event] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` doesn't return `true`; or

Reviewer 3: We do leave out a scenario where the implementation disables the event and the tester checks the instrument by pressing the same key but now with a modifier key. There will be no outcome because the event is disabled. The expectation says nothing about it. Of course, if the tester tests the same key without the modifier there will be no outcome, which is according to the expectation and the rule passes.
I guess your suggestion of adding an explanation to one of the examples could do the trick. I'll take the disable condition out of the expectation.

---
id: ffbc54
name: No keyboard shortcuts use only printable characters
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that if keyboard shortcuts are implemented using only printable characters, then there is a mechanism to disable the shortcut, or to remap the shortcut to use one or more non-printable characters keys, or the shortcut for a user interface component is only available when that component has focus.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:2.1.4: # Character Key Shortcuts (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: satisfied
    inapplicable: further testing needed
acknowledgements:
  authors:
    - João Vicente
    - Carlos Duarte
---

## Applicability

The rule applies to any [keyboard event][]: 
 - where the attribute `key` is a [printable character][] key; and

>  - the attribute `isComposing` is set to `false`; or the [keyboard event][] is part of an [composition event][] whose attribute `data` includes at least one [non-printable character][] key; and

Reviewer: The second part seems weird because the third item in the expectation is to force the event into exactly that case. I am not sure I fully understand what case you're trying to handle here.

Author: This second part was wrong. I copy pasted it from the expectation below and forgot to change it to make sense

>  - the attribute `isComposing` is set to `false`; or the [keyboard event][] is part of an [composition event][] whose attribute `data` includes at least one [non-printable character][] key; and

Reviewer: Also, I am not sure that composition events is what you're looking for.
As far as I understand, composition events are more for stuff like the `compose` key (e.g. `<compose>` `<dead_acute>` `<e>` produce `é`, but each key is pressed separately).

This is supported by https://www.w3.org/TR/uievents/#events-composition-key-events which show single key pressed one by one (i.e. `keydown` is followed by `keyup`) rather than multiple keys pressed together (i.e. two or more `keydown` before we start the `keyup`).

So, I do not think that composition events are what is needed for modifiers (`Ctrl` and such). Although I do agree that if part of a composition event, things are probably OK but even if the composition event only contains printable character keys (e.g. a page reacting to the sequence `h` `e` `l` `l` `o` `w` `o` `r` `l` `d` but not to any of the individual keys is OK).

Author: I understand what you are pointing out, and i'll probably need to do a little bit more research about the composition events. But without them we can only target some modifier keys (those who are available in the [event interface](https://www.w3.org/TR/uievents/#events-keyboardevents)), which are only a subset of the non-printable characters keys. But now that i'm revisiting the spec, i think i can use the getModifierState() mehtod to know if any modifier keys are being used. I'll change to use that

 - is [dispatched][] to an [event target][] within a [HTML document][].

## Expectation

For each test target:

>  - an [instrument][] to prevent the outcome of the [keyboard event][] is available; or

Reviewer: "prevent" might need some more explanation.

Also, this is a bit weird. The goal of the instrument is to "permanently" disable the event (or until toggled again). This sentence looks like "quick, I need to click on that button to prevent the key I just pressed from triggering stuff".
I feel this come from a mix between "keyboard event" being both the global thingie (the shortcut, i.e. the fact that the page reacts to me pressing some key), and the individual events that are fired every time one key is pressed.

Now, I do agree that "keyboard event" as defined refers to the global thingie and not to an individual event being fired… 🤔

>  - if the [event target][] does not have [focus], the outcome of the event is prevented; or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - if the [event target][] does not have [focus][], the outcome of the event is prevented; or
```

>  - if the [event target][] does not have [focus], the outcome of the event is prevented; or

Reviewer: Same remark about "prevent". I think it needs more details.
For example, if the event as 2 outcomes, one when the target is focused and one when it is not, then we might say that the "outcome when focused" is prevented when the target does not have focus.

I guess you want to say something like "the event has no outcome" which probably needs to be detailed into something like "the event does not result in changes in the visual content"…

Of course, changing the visual content is not the only bad thing a shortcut can do. But that would only mean we pass bad cases, which is OK. And it is a start, maybe we can add more bad outcomes that need to be explicitly prevented (playing audio/video, redirecting the page, …)

Well, anyway I think we need to clarify "prevent the outcome", especially since "change the outcome" does prevent it (but replaces with another outcome which might be just as bad).

    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

This [HTML document][] has an element with the attribute `accesskey`. Accesskeys use [non-printable characters][].

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Inapplicable Example 3</title>
    <script>
      function shortcut() {
        const button = document.querySelector("button");

        button.addEventListener("click", function() {
          document.getElementById("list").innerHTML +=
            "<li>Item</li>";
          event.preventDefault();
        });

        button.textContent = button.accessKeyLabel
          ? "Add item to list (" + button.accessKeyLabel + ")"
          : "Add item to list (accesskey +" + button.accessKey + ")";
      }
    </script>
  </head>

  <body onload="shortcut()">
    <button type="button" accesskey="+"></button>
    <br />
    <div>
      To do list
    </div>
    <ul id="list"></ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

[HTML document]: https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#concept-document
[focus]: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/#focusable-area
[event target]: https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#eventtarget 
[event]: https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#events

> [composition event]: https://www.w3.org/TR/uievents/#compositionevent

Reviewer: I think I would rather link this as it has some text explanation of the stuff.
```suggestion
[composition event]: https://www.w3.org/TR/uievents/#events-compositionevents
```

- [Keyboard shortcut can be disabled](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/670a30)
- [Keyboard shortcut can be remapped](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/aa8b52) 
- [Keyboard shortcut is only active when component has focus](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/1e9941)

## Assumptions

This rule assumes as applicable [keyboard shortcuts][keyboard shortcuts] those implemented by the test target [content][]. Any other means (e.g. browser extensions, browser settings, user agents, external browser applications) are not considered.

## Accessibility Support

_There are no major accessibility support issues known for this rule._

## Background

- [Understanding Success Criterion 2.1.4: Character Key Shortcuts](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/character-key-shortcuts.html)
- [G127 Providing a mechanism to allow users to remap or turn off character key shortcuts](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G217)
- [F99 Failure of Success Criterion 2.1.4 due to implementing character key shortcuts that cannot be turned off or remapped](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F99)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

> The [HTML document][] has a [keyboard shortcut][keyboard shortcuts] that uses one [printable][printable characters] and one [non-printable characters][].

Reviewer: I'd rather say which of the rules is passing, given that the composite rule is only checking if one of the atomic rules is passing.
This gets especially true if the example is already an example of one of the atomic rule. Then it is completely sufficient to just say "rule something is passing" and one can look it to figure out the precise reason.

Reviewer: True.
Composite rules currently have descriptions that explain why the corresponding atomic rule is passing. I am not aware of this being a conscious choice or just "the way it is". Example descriptions have been notably bad and are in need of reworking…

---
Why do I think that just saying "this example passes rule FOO" is better?
1. This is in line with the "This [test target] [meets expectations]" format worked in #834. The expectation of the composite rule is to pass some atomic rule, not to have a shortcut with non-printable character.
2. This emphasises the fact that composite rules know nothing about input aspects and can only care about the outcomes of atomic rules. For the reader, this reminds that point. For the writer, if you cannot write the example description like that, it is a strong indication that the composite rule is poorly written.
3. This is better future-proof for composite rules with more complex logic. A composite rule could be "each test target either passes rule A; or passes both rules B and C" or "each test target that passes rule A also passes rule B", … Writing example descriptions that go into the details of each atomic rule would get super-hairy with complex composite rules. Writing descriptions that just refer to rules outcome and the logic would stay fairly easy.

---
Of course, your mileage may vary. We have not really discussed how to uniformise example descriptions in composite rules. That's why my initial comment is written as a personal opinion and not as a strong request (and I won't block the PR if that's the only thing left).

rule_type: composite
description: |
  This rule checks that if keyboard shortcuts are implemented using only printable characters, then there is a mechanism to disable the shortcut, or to remap the shortcut to use one or more non-printable characters keys, or the shortcut for a user interface component is only available when that component has focus.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:2.1.4: # Character Key Shortcuts (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: satisfied
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_rules:
  - 670a30
  - aa8b52
  - 1e9941
acknowledgements:
  authors:
    - João Vicente
    - Carlos Duarte
---

## Applicability

The rule applies to any [HTML document][] with at least one [keyboard shortcut][] that requires pressing only [printable character][] keys to trigger an action on a [user interface component][].

## Expectation

For the test target, the outcome of at least one of the following rules is passed:

- [Printable keys only shortcut can be disabled](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/670a30)
- [Printable keys only shortcut can be remapped](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/aa8b52) 

> - [Printable key shortcut is only active when component has focus](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/1e9941)

Reviewer: I'm now having questions about the core of the composite rule 😱 

Consider something like that:
```
onload="
  registerShortcut( {focusOnly: true, shortcutKey: "a"});
  registerShortcut( {shortcutKey: "b", id: "b"});
  registerShortcut( {shortcutKey: "c", id: "c"});"
…
<input type="checkbox" onclick="toggleDisabled('b', !this.checked)">
<input type="checkbox" onclick="toggleModifier('c', !this.checked)">
```
This has a single UI component with 3 single key shortcuts. This does not pass any to the atomic rules:
1. The "disable" rule fails because shortcuts "a" and "c" cannot be disabled.
2. The "remap" rule fails because shortcuts "a" and "b" cannot be remapped.
3. The "focus" rule fails because shortcuts "b" and "c" are active even without focus.

Because all atomic rules fail, the composite rule also fails but this does not fail WCAG because each individual shortcut is good.

---
Because of the structure of the composite rules that we have (can only look at the result of the atomic rules, not at details), this will  stay as long as the applicability is on the full page…
The atomic rules are actually checking whether **ALL** shortcuts on the page are implementing a **single** method of making them good. Thus the composite rule can only get as input the answers to questions like "do **all** shortcuts on the page implement method A?" It is not possible for the composite rule to pass on a page where shortcuts implements different methods because the composite rule never sees the result of individual shortcuts.

---
This kinda shows that the rules must target individual shortcuts one way or another… Even targeting individual UI components is not enough given the example above.

## Applicability

The rule applies to any [keyboard event][]: 
 - where the attribute `key` is a [printable character][] key; and
 - the method `getModifierState` returns `false`; and
 - is [dispatched][] to an [event target][] within a [HTML document][].

## Expectation 1

For each test target:
 - an [instrument][] to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] is available; or
 - if the [event target][] doesn't have [focus][], any result of the event is prevented; or
 - an [instrument][] is available to force the [keyboard event][] to have the method `getModifierState` return `true`

> **Note:** The same [instrument][] can be used to disable/force more than one event.

Author: I created examples with one instrument and several instruments, but I think it is better to leave the note to reinforce the idea.

> **Note:** Preventing results of the event can be done in multiple ways (e.g. removing the event listener; handling the event in a different manner; ...) but the way in which it is done is not relevant for this rule.

Reviewer 5: I also think this can be removed. Especially as we state that this is not relevant for this rule.

Author: Same as the comment above, i think it is better to leave the note. This note is also being used in similar rules that target events, like the device motion one.

## Expectation 2

For each [instrument][] in the set of [instruments][instrument] from Expectation 1, one of the following is true:

- the [instrument][] is in the same [web page][] of the test target; or
- instructions for the user to locate the [instrument][] are in the same [web page][] of the test target.

> **Note:** If the set of instruments has more than one instrument, not every instrument of the set needs to be in the same location.

Reviewer 5: Probably we could:

* Move the idea of instrument or set of instruments to expectation 1.
* Remove references to the fact that they don't need to be in the same location. it is not clear to me where this is taken from.

Author: I'll update the rule, and hopefully it is easier to understand now.

## Applicability

The rule applies to any [keyboard event][] for which all is true: 
- the event's attribute `key` is a [printable character][] key; and
- the event's method `getModifierState` returns `false`; and
- the event is [dispatched][] to an [event target][] within a [HTML document][];
- the event causes [changes in content] of the [HTML document][].

## Expectation

For each test target at least one of the following is true:
 - **Disable**: there is at least one [set of clearly labelled instruments][] to [block events][blocked event] that use the [same key][same key events] of the test target; or
 - **Remap**: there is at least one [set of clearly labelled instruments][] to [block events][blocked event] that use the [same key][same key events] of the test target, unless the non-test target event `getModifierState` method returns `true` for any of the [valid modifier keys][]; or

>  - **Focus**: if the [event target][] doesn't have [focus][] the [event is blocked][blocked event].

Reviewer: Should that one use "makes no change in content"?
Same thing, again, but different feeling for the reader…

Not sure.

Reviewer 3: Glad you made this comment @Jym77 
It made me realize that the applicability cannot require that the event causes any change in the content of the document. Otherwise, it could never meet this part of the expectation. 

But I also prefer a formulation like "does not change the content" because it's more passive (i.e. the user is not required to do anything), versus the active "block the event by activating an instrument".

The rule applies to any [keyboard event][]: 
 - where the attribute `key` is a [printable character][] key; and
 - the method `getModifierState` returns `false`; and
 - is [dispatched][] to an [event target][] within a [HTML document][].

## Expectation 1

For each test target:
 - an [instrument][] to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] is available; or

>  - if the [event target][] doesn't have [focus][], any result of the event is prevented; or

Reviewer: There probably needs some assumption as to which results are considered. See this discussion https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/880#discussion_r424982737 but that rule does have an assumption to tackle the problem.

 - an [instrument][] is available to force the [keyboard event][] to have the method `getModifierState` return `true`

**Note:** The same [instrument][] can be used to disable/force more than one event.

**Note:** Preventing results of the event can be done in multiple ways (e.g. removing the event listener; handling the event in a different manner; ...) but the way in which it is done is not relevant for this rule.

## Expectation 2

For each [instrument][] in the set of [instruments][instrument] from Expectation 1, one of the following is true:

- the [instrument][] is in the same [web page][] of the test target; or

> - instructions for the user to locate the [instrument][] are in the same [web page][] of the test target.

Reviewer: You probably want to use https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/blob/54c6814c49cd4ef631444de8a63521f56f6f03e8/pages/glossary/clearly-labeled-location.md

## Applicability

The rule applies to any [keyboard event][] for which all of the following is true: 
- the event's attribute `key` is a [printable character][] key; and

> - the event's method `getModifierState` returns `false` for any of the [valid modifier keys][]; and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the event's method `getModifierState` returns `false` for each of the [valid modifier keys][]; and
```
I think "any" would mean that one of them is enough, which is clearly not what we want. Might need help from @EmmaJP or other native speaker here.

- the event causes [changes in the content][changes in content] of the [HTML document][].

## Expectation

For each test target at least one of the following is true:

> - (**remap**:) there is at least one [set of clearly labeled instruments][] to [block events][blocked event] that use the [same key][same key events] as the test target and whose `getModifierState` method returns `false` for any of the [valid modifier keys][]; or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (**remap**:) there is at least one [set of clearly labeled instruments][] to [block events][blocked event] that use the [same key][same key events] as the test target and whose `getModifierState` method returns `false` for each of the [valid modifier keys][]; or
```

The rule applies to any [keyboard event][] for which all is true: 
- the event's attribute `key` is a [printable character][] key; and
- the event's method `getModifierState` returns `false` for any of the [valid modifier keys][].

## Expectation

For each test target at least one of the following is true:
 - (**Remap**:) there is at least one [set of clearly labeled instruments][] to [block events][blocked event] that use the [same key][same key events] as the test target and whose `getModifierState` method returns `false` for any of the [valid modifier keys][]; or

>  - (**Focus**:) if the [event target][] does not have a [semantic role][] that inherits from the [abstract role](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#abstract_roles) of `widget` the event does not cause [changes in content][] of the [HTML document][].

Reviewer 3: Great simplification!

 - the method `getModifierState` returns `false`; and
 - is [dispatched][] to an [event target][] within a [HTML document][].

## Expectation

For each test target at least one of the following is true:
 - (**Disable**:) There is at least one set of [instruments][instrument], where each [instrument][] is in the same [web page][] of the registered event or can be found in a [clearly labeled location][] from that [web page][]. The set of [instruments][instrument] can be used to prevent [changes to the content][changes in content] of the [web page][] resulting from the [keyboard event][] within a 10 minute time span of the [event firing][]; or
 - (**Focus**:) If the [event target][] doesn't have [focus][] there are no [changes to the content][changes in content] resulting from the [keyboard event][] within a 10 minute time span of the [event firing][]; or

>  - (**Remap**:) There is at least one set of [instruments][instrument], where each [instrument][] is in the same [web page][] of the registered event or can be found in a [clearly labeled location][] from that [web page][]. The set of [instruments][instrument] can be used to prevent [changes to the content][changes in content] of the [web page][] within a 10 minute time span of the [event firing][] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` returns `false`;

Reviewer: I agree that it still doesn't read very well… 😕 
A couple of (different) ideas:

1. Now that we're back to a single expectation with "A or B or C", it might be possible to go back to a composite rule with three atomics ones 😱 Breaking out of the bullets list may leave more room for writing in a less confusing way.

2. Using intermediate definitions can maybe help…
In this case I'm thinking about : "clearly labelled set of instruments (or set of clearly labelled instruments)" = "set of instruments that are all clearly labelled"; "blocked event" = "the event makes no changes in content within 10 minutes of being fired".
Then, the expectation becomes:
    - (**Disable**) There is at least one [clearly labelled set of instruments] to [block the event]; or
    - (**Focus**) The event is [blocked] if the target doesn't have focus; or
    - (**Remap**) There is at least one [clearly labelled set of instruments] to [block the event] when its `getModifierState` is false

    The 3rd one might need a bit polishing to get the intention right, also need to make clear that 1st and 3rd mean "after activating the instruments, the event is forever blocked (until instruments are activated to unblock it)".

>  - (**Remap**:) There is at least one set of [instruments][instrument], where each [instrument][] is in the same [web page][] of the registered event or can be found in a [clearly labeled location][] from that [web page][]. The set of [instruments][instrument] can be used to prevent [changes to the content][changes in content] of the [web page][] within a 10 minute time span of the [event firing][] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` returns `false`;

Reviewer: And looking at this now that it streamlined, I'm wondering if (**Disable**) is really needed…

Everything that pass *Disable** will also pass **Remap**: if the event is always blocked, then it is blocked when `getModifierState` is false…

We could have **Remap** be refined ("…and the event isn't blocked when `getModifierState` is true"). But I am actually not sure it is needed…

With a note (or rather example description, we avoid notes now…), it could be pointed out that disabling the event completely does indeed pass the rule. **Remap** would have to be renamed, though…

## Expectation 1

For each test target at least one of the following is true:

>  - (**Disable**:) a set of one or more [instruments][instrument] are available to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] within a 10 minute time span of the [event firing][]; or

Reviewer: "prevent any result" might be a bit too generic. See discussion (and possible solution) at https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1276#discussion_r436615334 and https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1276/files/621237308c19c3314dc3a7b104db4a9c8cf9678c..2e8eb9a051180f5fc3bc094c2032372e5558f8a0

I thing it might also help tightening the rule to specifically target keyboard shortcuts that create "changes in content"

Being more precise about the changes we monitor will also help killing off the second note as requested by @daniel-montalvo.

 - (**Focus**:) any result of the event is prevented if the [event target][] doesn't have [focus][] within a 10 minute time span of the [event firing][]; or

>  - (**Remap**:) a set of one or more [instruments][instrument] are available to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` returns `false` within a 10 minute time span of the [event firing][].

Reviewer: Expectation 2 is now somewhat wonky and it feel like it need to be merged with expectation 1.
The separation also triggers the same problem we spotted in https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/960#discussion_r434460815

>  - (**Remap**:) a set of one or more [instruments][instrument] are available to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` returns `false` within a 10 minute time span of the [event firing][].

Reviewer: The "within 10 minutes" part need to be reformulate to make clear what (and how) it applies to.

"prevent any result if the target doesn't have focus within 10 minutes" reads more like "prevent any result (if the target doesn't have focus within 10 minutes)" which makes little sense (what does it means to "not have focus within 10 minutes"?)

>  - (**Remap**:) a set of one or more [instruments][instrument] are available to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` returns `false` within a 10 minute time span of the [event firing][].

Reviewer: Also, two of the items use "prevent any result" and one uses "any result is prevented" => unify the formulations.

> For each test target:

Reviewer: Name the conditions as in #1275 so you'll be able to easily refer to them in the descriptions.

>  - an [instrument][] to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] is available; or

Reviewer: If an event has more than one outcome but these are disabled by different instruments, it will fail the rule but pass the SC.
(e.g. `+` both adds an item to the list and jumps focus to the list, a button stops `+` from jumping, another one stops it from adding elements, both buttons can be activated at the same time)

 - if the [event target][] doesn't have [focus][], any result of the event is prevented; or

>  - an [instrument][] is available to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` returns `false`.

Reviewer: Same point: could be more than one instrument.

> For each [instrument][] in the set of [instruments][instrument] from Expectation 1, one of the following is true:

Reviewer: Expectation 1 is currently not generating a set of instrument (even though it should). Also, Expectation 1 can generate 0 instruments in the case of the focus condition.

See https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1276#discussion_r432342251

- the [instrument][] is in the same [web page][] of the test target; or
- the [instrument][] can be found in a [clearly labeled location][].

**Note:** If the set of instruments has more than one instrument, not every instrument of the set needs to be in the same location.

## Assumptions

> - The event listeners listening to device motion events trigger a functionality in the web page. If they do not trigger any such functionality failing this rule might not be a failure of the success criterion.

Reviewer: copy/pasting too much, this is not about device motion.

> - If there are ways to disable the device motion based functionality that do not require the user to interact with the web page (e.g. a setting at the operating system level), failing this rule might not be a failure of the success criterion.

Reviewer: Same, update mention of device motion to the relevant one.

## Accessibility Support

> Currently [keyboard events][keyboard event] only support the types `keydown` and `keyup`. [Keyboard events][keyboard event] of type `keypressed` are considered [legacy keyboard events][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently [keyboard events][keyboard event] only support the types `keydown` and `keyup`. [Keyboard events][keyboard event] of type `keypressed` are considered [legacy keyboard events][] and are thus ignored by this rule.
```

> #### Passed Example 5

Reviewer: Passed Examples 5-6 feel a bit redundant (they illustrate the same think as Passed Example 2-3).

Author: They illustrate the same, but for different parts of the expectation. Examples 2-3 are for the **disable** mechanism, and examples 5-6 are for the **remap** mechanism.

#### Passed Example 7

This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`, and:

>  - exists an [instrument][] to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][]; and
>  - exists an [instrument][] to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` returns `false`; and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - there exists an [instrument][] to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][]; and
 - there exists an [instrument][] to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` returns `false`; and
```

#### Inapplicable Example 1

> This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] but it only causes [changes in content][] if the event's attribute `key` is a [non-printable character][non-printable characters].

Reviewer: I'm actually not sure this example is working in its current state.
I don't think that pressing Ctrl alone triggers a keyboard event. And given that the default key is `''`, pressing Ctrl+anything will fail the test on https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/873/files/5ba7404896460d5f279b3f5d8a7496f61dbb4061..225df1c2a17404420a433f500901097f20401d02#diff-b6da7667926ff757a971a635c511cccbR18

We should replace this with an example with Escape or similar key.

Reviewer 3: Made the suggested change.

</html>
```

> #### Passed Example 8

Reviewer: Order expectations (and their items) the same way your order examples.
Currently, expectations are ordered stop/focus/modifier/location and the examples stop/modifier/location/focus.

> This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`, and the result is not prevented because the [event target][] has [focus][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`, but the result is prevented when the [event target][] doesn't have [focus][].
```

</html>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 2

> This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] but it does not cause [changes in content][] unless the `getModifierState` returns `true`.

Reviewer: This is indeed correct for testing points 2 and 3 of the Applicability. But I add to think a bit to convince myself of it… Not sure if we can update the description in a way that make it clearer without being too heavy 🤔 
(the think is that events that can be triggered either have `getModifierState("Control")` return `true` (failing 2nd point); or do not cause change in content (failing 3rd point). And it's not really possible to split these conditions in separate tests since any event can be fired by users…

So feel free to ignore this comment 😉

Reviewer 3: The only way I can think to improve the description is to name conditions in the applicability list (e.g. "printable key", "no modifier", "changes content"), so they could be referenced here. Do you think it is worth it?

Reviewer: No, this should be good.

</html>
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] [dispatched][] to an [event target][] with the attribute `key` being a [printable character][] and the method `getModifierState` returning `false`, and:

>  - doesn't exist any [instrument][] to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][]; nor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - there doesn't exist any [instrument][] to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][]; nor
```

 - the result of the [keyboard event][] is prevented when the [event target][] doesn't have [focus][]; nor

>  - exists any any [instrument][] to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` returns `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - there doesn't exists any [instrument][] to prevent any result of the [keyboard event][] when the [keyboard event][] method `getModifierState` returns `false`.
```

</html>
```

> 

Reviewer: Need a failed example passing expectation 1 but failing expectation 2 (hmmm, I guess instrument in a modal and nothing identifying the modal or its opening button as a setting page).

</html>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 4

> This [HTML document][] has a [keyboard event][] that is not [dispatched][] to an [event target][].

Reviewer: I guess the event could be listened only by the `window` object. That would not be in the HTML page and thus be good…
